# Assignment 4: Context Free Grammars

For some parts of this assignment, you will need to use NLTK.

To install NLTK, run:

```shell
pip3 install numpy
pip3 install nltk
```

You may need to type sudo (Unix) or csudo (Cmder) in front of these commands.



1. Give context-free grammars that generate thre of the e following languages:

(Problem 2.4 in Sipser 1st edition)

(a) {w | w contains at least three 1s}

(b) {w | w starts and ends with the same symbol}

(c) {w | the length of w is odd}

(d) {w | the length of w is odd and its middle symbol is 0}

(e) {w | w contains more 1s than 0s}

(f) {w | w = w^R, i.e., w is a palindrome}



2.  Use the Natural Language Tool Kit (NLTK) to write a Python program that defines and parses the grammar (G2) described at the beginning of Section 2.1. You'll need to following imports:

```python
from nltk import CFG
import nltk
from nltk.draw.tree import TreeView
from nltk.parse.generate import generate
```

See https://www.nltk.org/book/ch08.html as a reference, but I have provided some example code.

(a) What language is generated by the example code?  Verify this by generating example strings of which one is at least length 10.  Include the strings you generated.

(b) Generate the parse tree for this string of length 10.

(c) In a new file, G2.py, Implement the sentence grammar described at the beginning of Section 2.1 in Sipser.  

(d) Generate strings from this grammar, at least some of which are eleven words.

(e) Visualize the parse(s) for the string  "a boy touches a boy with a flower". 

(f) Is this grammar ambiguous?  How do you know?

(g) What is the CNF form of this grammar?

