2021-compling/labs/lab7.md, before:

# Lab 7 (10 pts)

You may find [Chapter 8](https://www.nltk.org/book/ch08.html) of the NLTK book useful.  I have also provided starter code.  While it is not necessary, note that if you are working in the Windows Subsystem for Linux or remotely via SSH, you may not be able to use `draw()` to render the tree parses on your screen.  For this, you'll have to run the native Windows version of Python. 

## Description

For this lab, you will modify a context-free grammar to increase its precision.  The provided **lexicalized** grammar is language $\mathscr{L}_1$ from [Chapter 13](https://web.stanford.edu/~jurafsky/slp3/13.pdf) of J&M.  

* The [provided code](https://github.com/acgrissom/courses/blob/master/2020-compling/labs/code/lab6.py) will use `generate()` to generate up to $n$ possible sentences from the grammar specification with a given maximum recursive depth. 
* The provided code uses `parse()` to produce a legal parse of a given string (a sentence or clause, in human language) and print the possible parses in parenthetical form.  If there is more than one parse, the string is **ambiguous.** 

## Assignment

You will notice that several of the sentences allowed by the grammar are ungrammatical in English.  You will improve this grammar by implementing at least **one** of the following without breaking the functional parts of the grammar.

A.

1. Distinguish between subject and object pronouns, disallowing sentences like "I book I" but allowing sentences like "I book me."
2. Implement some version of "and" and "or."
3. Implement any generative form of negation.
4. Handle the prepositional phrase starting with "with", e.g., "with him."

B.  Submit your revised code and a PDF which briefly (a few sentences) describes how you approached this problem and what your solution was.

Commit message:

change lab7 to encoder decoder

2021-compling/labs/lab7.md, after:

# Encoder-Decoder Lab

For this lab, we will again use some Keras’s example starter code for LSTM-based encoder-decoder models here: https://keras.io/examples/nlp/lstm_seq2seq/.  The purpose of this lab if to give students some intuition some experience training a simple neural machine trnaslation model

Read the tutorial and run the code, either on a Haverford GPU machine or Google Collab.  Recall that the encoder LSTM (or GRU) creates a contextualized representation of the input tokens.  The following line returns the hidden state and a cell state, returned by the following line:

```python
encoder_outputs, state_h, state_c = encoder(encoder_inputs)
encoder_states = [state_h, state_c]
```

The variable `state_h` holds the final hidden state, after all characters have been read.  The initial hidden state of the decoder is then set to the final hidden state of the encoder.

```python
decoder_outputs, _, _ = decoder_lstm(decoder_inputs, initial_state=encoder_states)
```



Then the model chooses the next character to predict with a softmax over all possible characters. 

```
decoder_dense = keras.layers.Dense(num_decoder_tokens, activation="softmax")
```

The task for this lab is simple:  Collaborate (in person and/or on Piazza) with other students to run the translation system for various numbers of epochs and other parameters and make note of the kinds of translations produced.  You will likely find that the translation systems struggles significantly and isn't entirely consistent in what it learns. Submit to Moodle qualitative observations of what you found and who you collaborated with.
